Add an Inside Rust blog post for bootstrap sequence redesign (#1582)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: content/inside-rust/stage0-std-redesign.md

+++
title = "Redesigning stage 0 std"
authors = ["Jieyou Xu"]

[extra]
team = "Bootstrap"
team_url = "https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/infra#team-bootstrap"
+++

# Redesigning stage 0 std

## Summary

We are reworking how the stage 0 bootstrap sequence works (the sequence used to build a stage 1 compiler).

> - Before: a stage 0 (possibly beta) compiler is used to build the in-tree std, which in turn is used to build the stage 1 compiler.
> - After: a stage 0 (possibly beta) compiler and a precompiled stage 0 std is instead used to build the stage 1 compiler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Before: a stage 0 (beta by default) compiler is used to build the in-tree std, which in turn is used to build the stage 1 compiler.
- After: a stage 0 (beta by default) compiler and a precompiled stage 0 std is instead used to build the stage 1 compiler.
```

Author: Fixed in 222f4feba50e4be53a56843b95563f8ef0ba031a

Notably, this means:

- `./x {build,test,check} library --stage 0` becomes no-op, as stage 0 std is no longer the built in-tree std, and the minimum supported stage to build std is now `1`.

>     - Consequently, default (test, check, bench) stage values in the library profile are no longer `0`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could say what is the new stage? :D I assume it's 1?

Author: Yeah

Author: Fixed in c8d819a5a40b5bc8e0e81314172eeff4471838ec

> - `cfg(bootstrap)` is no longer needed for library development. In (very) rare cases, `cfg(bootstrap)` may be needed in the compiler for dogfooding unstable library features.

Reviewer: > In (very) rare cases, `cfg(bootstrap)` may be needed in the compiler for dogfooding unstable library features.

Note that we already use cfg(bootstrap) on compiler tree for some cases, so cfg(bootstrap) usage on compiler tree won't be a new thing.

## Motivation

The previous stage 0 bootstrapping sequence was a source of endless confusion for compiler, library and bootstrap contributors alike, because std had to support being built by *both* a previous possibly-beta rustc and in-tree rustc, with `cfg(bootstrap)` in std sources necessary to distinguish between them. By adjusting the stage 0 bootstrap sequence to instead use a precompiled stage 0 std instead of building the in-tree std, we hope to (1) simplify library development workflow to no longer need `cfg(bootstrap)` and (2) enable simplifying some bootstrap logic related to building in-tree std in stage 0.

This was [originally proposed by @jyn514 in the MCP rust-lang/compiler-team#619](https://github.com/rust-lang/compiler-team/issues/619).

## What does this mean for a typical library workflow?

- Crucially, `./x {build,test,check} library --stage 0` becomes no-op and are no longer supported. Building the in-tree std now requires a stage 1 compiler.

>     - Consequently, library contributors are **strongly** encouraged to enable `rust.download-rustc = "if-unchanged"` to avoid having to build a stage 1 compiler.

Reviewer 2: This is the default for the `library` profile, we should mention that if they are using it already, they will be fine.

Author: Good point, I mentioned it mostly because some contributors don't use a profile at all

Author: Further clarified in c8d819a5a40b5bc8e0e81314172eeff4471838ec.

+++

> path = "inside-rust/9999/12/31/redesigning-stage-0-std"

Author: FIXME(jieyouxu): update this date when we're ready
